01. What is CaliBrain?
========================


Scientific motivation
---------------------


M/EEG source imaging estimates neural source activity from sensor measurements.
The inverse problem is ill posed: many source configurations can explain the
same measured signal. For simulation studies, CaliBrain uses known source
activity to ask a precise question:

   When a solver reports uncertainty, do its credible intervals contain the true
   simulated source activity as often as their nominal coverage claims?

This tutorial introduces the package at a high level and runs a lightweight
calibration example that does not require external forward models or paper data.
It is the first tutorial because the rest of the documentation builds on the
same artifact flow and terminology.

What CaliBrain does
-------------------


CaliBrain separates a calibration study into four stages:

.. code-block:: text

   simulate or load source/sensor data
           -> estimate sources and posterior uncertainty
           -> compute empirical coverage and calibration metrics
           -> aggregate results into JSON summaries and figures


For paper-scale experiments, the workflow scripts persist these stages as:

.. code-block:: text

   posterior H5 summaries + manifest CSV
           -> aggregated NPZ datasets + JSON sidecars
           -> calibration JSON summaries
           -> publication figures


For a first lightweight example, we can bypass large workflow artifacts and use
small synthetic arrays directly with ``UncertaintyEstimator``.

Concepts introduced
-------------------


- **Posterior mean**: the solver's estimate \(\hat{x}\) of the true source
  activity.
- **Posterior variance**: source-wise uncertainty used to build credible
  intervals.
- **Nominal coverage**: the requested coverage level, for example \(0.9\).
- **Empirical coverage**: the fraction of true source values that fall inside
  the interval.
- **Perfect calibration**: empirical coverage equals nominal coverage across
  the coverage grid.

Minimal runnable example
------------------------


The executable tutorial lives in the repository-level ``tutorials`` directory.
During ``make html``, Sphinx-Gallery executes this script and renders the
gallery page under ``docs/source/auto_tutorials``:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../tutorials/01_what_is_calibrain.py
   :language: python
   :linenos:


Expected output:

.. code-block:: text

   [0.    0.125 0.229 0.354 0.458 0.542 0.542 0.646 0.771 0.854 1.   ]


The exact values are deterministic because the random seed is fixed.

Files produced
--------------


Running the script writes:

- ``results/tutorials/01_what_is_calibrain/calibration_curve.png``
- ``results/tutorials/01_what_is_calibrain/calibration_curve.npz``

The PNG is the calibration plot. The NPZ stores the numerical curve and active
source indices for later inspection.

Interpreting the result
-----------------------


The dashed diagonal is perfect calibration. The synthetic posterior curve is not
expected to be exactly diagonal because the posterior mean and posterior
variance were generated by a simple toy model rather than by a calibrated
inverse solver. In real CaliBrain experiments, this same comparison is computed
for each solver, noise condition, subject, orientation type, and calibration
strategy.

The key interpretation rule is:

- empirical coverage below the diagonal indicates undercoverage
  (overconfident uncertainty);
- empirical coverage above the diagonal indicates overcoverage
  (underconfident uncertainty);
- post-calibration aims to move the empirical curve closer to the diagonal on
  held-out evaluation data.

How this connects to the full workflow
--------------------------------------


This tutorial used arrays directly. The production workflow uses the same
scientific objects but stores them explicitly on disk:

- data generation writes raw posterior summaries and a manifest CSV;
- aggregation reads the manifest and writes calibration-ready NPZ files;
- calibration reads NPZ files and writes JSON summaries;
- plotting reads JSON summaries to create publication figures.

The next tutorials replace this toy posterior with real simulated source and
sensor data, inverse solvers, and workflow artifacts.

Rendered gallery page
---------------------

The executed Sphinx-Gallery version of this tutorial is available from the
`Executable Gallery <../../auto_tutorials/index.html>`_ after building the
documentation.
